# Week Nine, Lecture One: Turing Machines and Their Types

[Stanford slides on this topic](https://web.stanford.edu/class/archive/cs/cs103/cs103.1134/lectures/19/Small19.pdf)

## Generators ⚡️ and Deciders 🔮

TMs don't *have* to be used as a decider or a recognizer, something which just recognizes an already existing language. We can actually use a TM to **generate/enumerate** a new language.

Assume we have a generator hooked up to a recognizer:

```
[Σ*]--> ε, w0, w1, ... [M]
```

If M accepts w after n steps, we can imagine an infinite matrix of all strings over Σ and up to the number of steps M takes to accept a string:

```
   ε w  ...    w
1 |S| | | | | | |
-----------------
2 | | | | | | | |
-----------------
...
-----------------
n | | | | | | |Y|
```

We can imagine that the TM "zigzags" across this matrix, starting at cell S, until we eventually land in cell Y at (w, n).

This is *not* diagonalization.

### Why Recursive?

Why do we call deciders "recursive"? And why do we call recognizers "recursively-enumerable"?

Back in the days before a computer, mathematics was done in a "closed form solution" manner e.g. writing down a formula and solving something on pen and paper. 

## Universal TM 🌌

This is all great, but how do we represent Real problems with TMs? We want to be able to represent "real world problems" as inputs to a TM.

- Lists of numbers? Let our alphabet Σ = {0, 1, #} where # is a separator

- Rational numbers we can do as fractions.

- **It is not possible to represent all real numbers**, at least like this

- Ordered pairs of numbers e.g. graphs and DFAs

This leads to the conclusion that we can even represent *a Turing machine* as a string to input into *another Turing machine*. We call such a TM, which takes as input an encoding of another TM, a **universal Turing machine**. 🌌"Universal" because it is "capable of performing **any computation** that could *ever* be computed (by any feasible computing machine)" (from Stanford slides, annotations mine).

So we can have:

<div align='center'>
{w | w is an encoding of a DFA}
</div>

and input that into a TM and have it check the DFA is properly encoded.

Or

<div align='center'>
L<sub>TM</sub> = {w | w is a TM}
</div>

So L<sub>TM</sub> is the set of *all* Turing machines (encoded into a string).

We can also have the input be both the encoding of the machine AND the input string:

<div align='center'>
A<sub>DFA</sub> = {(D, w) | D is an encoding of a DFA M and w is an encoding of an input string over the alphabet of M AND M accepts w}
</div>

This is the jump from *syntax to semantics*, from *recognition* to *simulation*. A<sub>DFA</sub> is the set of <u>all</u> DFAs and all strings that each machine accepts. We can do this for PDAs, CFGs, etc.

Most importantly, we can do this for *other* Turing machines. This is the **universal Turing machine language**:

<div align='center'>
L<sub>UTM</sub> = {(M, w) | M is an encoding of a TM M and M accepts input w} 
</div>

which is **undecidable** i.e. recursively-enumerable (but not recursive). By simulation, we can exactly run M:

- If M accepts w, we accept w

- If M rejects w, we accept w

- If M loops forever, we loop forever

There is also, similarly, the **halting problem language**

<div align='center'>
L<sub>HP</sub> = {(M, w) | M is an encoding of a TM M and M halts on w}
</div>

which is an **undecidable language**. This language describes the **Halting Problem**:

*It is impossible to create a computer program that takes another computer program as input and decides if it halts on all inputs.*

## Basic Properties of Recursively Enumerable Languages

<div align='center'>
FSL ⊂ DCFL ⊂ CFL ⊂ Recursive ⊂ Recursively Enumerable ⊂ 𝒫(Σ*)
</div>

where 𝒫(Σ\*) is the set of all strings.

The complement of "recursive" (aka "decidable") languages are the "undecidable languages," which also include the recursively enumerable aka "recognizable" languages. These are undecidable because it is not known if they will ever halt. These are the things that are, fundamentally, uncomputable.

Recursive languages **are** closed under complementation.

- Proof: switch accept and reject states

Are recursively enumerable languages closed under complementation?

- No because what is the complement of a looping?

- If some language L is recursively enumerable AND its complement L' is recursively enumerable, then they are not just recursively enumerable, but *recursive*.

- We can run both of these machines in "parallel" aka "time sharing."


