# Week Nine, Lecture Two

## Infinities 🐟🐠

**Countably infinite sets** - Any set which can be put in a one-to-one correspondence with the natural numbers ℕ.

- ex: all even integers ((x, x / 2)), all integers ({(1, 1), (-1, 2), (2, 3), (-2, 4), ... }), the set of all Turing machines (because any Turing machine can be represented with a string)

**Uncountably infinite sets** - Any set which *cannot* be put into a one-to-one correspondence with the natural numbers ℕ.

- ex: 𝒫(Σ\*) (the power set of all strings over Σ (i.e. all languages over Σ\*))

Suppose for contradiction that the set of all languages over Σ\* were countable. Then we could have a matrix with the columns as every string over Σ\* and the rows being the natural numbers assigned to a language:

|     | ε   | 0   | 1   | ... | w   |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| L0  | ✅   | ✅   | ❌   |     |     |
| L1  |     | ❌   |     |     |     |
| L2  |     |     | ✅   |     |     |
| ... |     |     |     |     |     |
| LN  |     |     |     |     | ❓   |

Consider cell (L<sub>N</sub>, w) (the one marked with ❓). It is in the diagonal from (L<sub>0</sub>, ε). When we take this diagonal, we get this infinite string of yesses and nos called R, which itself must describe some language which is also in the matrix. Now let's take the inverse of R and call it R'. R' must also be in the matrix. Let the row containing R' be D'. Where is D'? It cannot be L0, since D' differs from L0 at ε. It cannot be L1, because D' differs from L1 at 0. In fact, it cannot be *any* language listed, because it differs from that language in at least one cell: the cell that was inverted. Thus, **D' cannot be in the matrix** and the set of all languages over Σ* is NOT countable.

This is known as **Cantor's diagonal**.

Because the set of all Turing machines is countably infinite, but the set of all languages over Σ\* isn't, we *know* that **there are problems not recognizable by a Turing machine**!

## Universal Turing Machine

We know that we can have the language of Turing machines and the strings they accept:

<div align='center'>
L<sub>UTM</sub> := {(M, w) | M is an encoded TM and M accepts w}
</div>

Now, let's define L<sub>self</sub>:

<div align='center'>
L<sub>self</sub> := {w | w is an encoded TM M that accepts w (itself)}
</div>

L<sub>self</sub> is the set of all strings of encoded Turing machines that accept the encoding of *themselves*.

- This seems weird, but it's sort of like building a C compiler from source with the C compiler e.g. compiling GCC with GCC

L<sub>self</sub> is **recursively enumerable but not recursive** because, basically, it can loop forever on itself. 

## Not Even Recursively Enumerable

We can show a language that is not even recursively enumerable: the complement of L<sub>self</sub>, L'<sub>self</sub>. 

<div align='center'>
L'<sub>self</sub> := { w | w encodes TM M and M does not accept w}
</div>

Suppose by contradiction that L'<sub>self</sub> were recursively enumerable. Then there would be a TM M that recognizes L'<sub>self</sub>.

- M halts and accepts on w if w encodes a TM that does not accept itself

- M does not accept if w encodes a TM that does accept itself

We once again use Cantor's Diagonal to show there is a contradiction. The columns are *all* strings over Σ\*. The rows are *all* Turing machines. Each cell corresponds to an recognition: (M, w) is ✅ if M accepts w and ❌ if M does not accept w.

|     | w0  | w1  | ... | wm  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| M0  |     |     |     |     |
| M1  |     |     |     |     |
| ... |     |     |     |     |
| Mm  |     |     |     | ❓   |

Since we have all strings, there must be some encoding w<sub>m</sub> of some Turing machine M<sub>m</sub>. What is the value of (M<sub>m</sub>, w<sub>m</sub>)?

If (M<sub>m</sub>, w<sub>m</sub>) = 0, then M<sub>m</sub> does not accept w<sub>m</sub>. Since w<sub>m</sub> is an encoding of M<sub>m</sub>, then w<sub>m</sub> ∈ L'<sub>self</sub>. Because w<sub>m</sub> ∈ L'<sub>self</sub>, then (M<sub>m</sub>, w<sub>m</sub>) = 1 because we accept (i.e. 1) if our machine does *not* accept. We have a mutual contradiction, a paradox. 

If (M<sub>m</sub>, w<sub>m</sub>) = 1, then M<sub>m</sub> accepts w<sub>m</sub>. Then it w ∉ L'<sub>self</sub> i.e. (M<sub>m</sub>, w<sub>m</sub>) = 0!

M<sub>m</sub> cannot exist because there is no valid answer for what (M<sub>m</sub>, w<sub>m</sub>) is. If it's 0, then

we are in L'<sub>self</sub> because M<sub>m</sub> does not accept itself, so it should be 1. If it's 1, then we are not in L'<sub>self</sub> because M<sub>m</sub> accepts itself, so it should be 0.


