# Week Three, Lecture One

## Recap

Finite state languages are all languages accepted by a finite state machine. :robot:

- FSM = DFA or NFA

DFAs are a very concrete model of patterns. NFAs are a very abstract model. Is there something in between?

- Is there a "pure pattern" model?

- Yes, **regular expressions**.

Regular expressions are declarative, "pure patterns," not in any way imperative.

- They do not tell you *how* like a DFA

But in fact, regular expressions are exactly equivalent to both DFAs and NFAs (which are also equivalent).

<div align="center">
RegEx = DFA = NFA
</div>

## Regular Expressions :unicorn::cat::star2:

With just three operations, you can represent everything you can with an FSM:

1. Union :unicorn:

2. Concatenation :cat:

3. Kleene star :star2:

| Syntax        | Semantics                                                        |
| ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| a             | {a}                                                              |
| ε             | {ε}                                                              |
| Ø             | {}                                                               |
| R &cup; S     | "Set of strings denoted by R" &cup; "Set of string denoted by S" |
| R &cir; S     | "Set of strings denoted by R" &cir; "Set of string denoted by S" |
| R<sup>*</sup> | (Set denoted by R)<sup>*</sup>                                   |

Suppose we have an alphabet {0,1} a language L = {all even length strings}. How would we represent this with a RegEx?

<div align="center">
((0 ∪ 1) &cir; (0 ∪ 1))<sup>*</sup>
</div>

Suppose we have another language L = {no two 1's adjacent}.

<div align="center">
0<sup>*</sup>(100<sup>*</sup>)<sup>*</sup> ○ (1 ∪ &epsi;)
</div>

We need the term "&cir; (1 &cup; &epsilon;)" to account for "01".

## Context-Free Grammars

<div align="center">
G := (V, Σ, R, S)
</div>

- V = finite set of variables
  
  - usually represented as capital letters

- &Sigma; - finite set of terminals/symbols
  
  - same thing as alphabet

- R = finite set of rewriting rules
  
  - of the type V &RightArrow; (V &cup; &Sigma;)<sup>*</sup>

- S = start variable

In terms of operator precedence, Kleene-star > concatenation > union.

- This also corresponds to our intuition of concatenation as multiplication and union as addition (and kinda Kleene-star as exponentation?).


