# Week Four, Lecture One
## Pumping Lemma Proofs 🚲💨
You **can**:
- select any string s ∈ L where |s| >= p
- accidentally choose some *s* which DOES satisfy the pumping lemma and CAN be pumped to any length

You **cannot**:
- assume the partition of *xyz* e.g. "let x = ..." or "let xy = ..."
- assume that some "{w | w=rst}" means x=r, y=s, z=t
    - x,y,z can be ANY possible assignment
    - you have to show that NO possible assignment works

## Chomsky Hierarchy Proofs
Remember that the following models are all equivalent:
<div align="center">
DFA ≣ NFA ≣ GNFA ≣ RegEx
</div>

- It is rather trivial that a DFA is equivalent to an NFA, as a DFA is just a specific, particularly strict *type* of NFA
- It is also intuitive that an NFA is equivalent to a GNFA, as a GNFA is a *generalized* NFA

However, the following proofs are less obvious and we'll be going over (within a week at least):
1. NFA ≣ DFA
2. RegEx ≣ NFA i.e. grep is taking a pattern (RegEx) and going to an executable program (specifically RegEx → NFA → DFA)
3. GNFA ≣ RegEx

Note that **all** these proofs are *constructive* proofs i.e. we will be proving you can construct one from the other.

## RegEx ≣ GNFA
Take your initial state in your GNFA and your accepting state. Since GNFAs allow more than one matched symbol per transition, we can literally just put the RegEx *R* on that one label from q<sub>0</sub> to q<sub>A</sub>.

## NFA ≣ DFA
You are given an NFA *N* := (Q, Σ, δ, q<sub>0</sub>, F) and the language that is accepted by N is ℒ(N). Your task is to show that there is some DFA *M* (remember that these are all constructive proofs!) such that ℒ(M) = ℒ(N) i.e. N and M accept the same language.

<div align="center">
Write. It. Down.<br>
📝. 🤡. ⬇️!
</div>

M := (𝒫(Q), Σ, δ', ?, F').

Every possible state that N could ever go through is denoted as δ<sup>\*</sup>(q<sub>0</sub>, w) = R for some string w in ℒ(N) i.e. given some string in ℒ(N), our machine N must accept that string. (R ⊆ F).



