# Week Five, Lecture One

## Pumping Lemma

If L is a finite state language, then there exists a constant p, that depends only on L, such that for all s ∈ L, if |s| ≥ p, then:

- there exists substrings x, y, z such that s can be broken down s := xyz and xyz obey the following constraints:

- x ∈ Σ<sup>*</sup>

- y ∈ Σ<sup>+</sup>

- z ∈ Σ<sup>*</sup>

- len(x) + len(y) ≤ p

- for all i ≥ 0, xy<sup>i</sup>z ∈ L

Key points:

- "there exists p..."
  
  - can only give a name p, cannot decide on a specific value other than > 0
  
  - as long as we do not assume a specific value of p, we do not have to do anything extra to show that all values of p are invalid

- "for all s..."
  
  - so we need to find just *one* value of s
  
  - *our choice!* 😄

- "there exists substrings x, y, z"
  
  - to contradict an existential quantifier, we must provide a *universal* quantifier
  
  - i.e. we have to contradict all possible values of x, y, z

- "for all i ≥ 0 ..."
  
  - we just need to find one value of i for a contradiction
  
  - usually i = 0 or i = 2 works

**All regular languages** obey the pumping lemma. However, **not all pumping lemma-compliant languages are regular**.

In other words, the pumping lemma is **necessary but not sufficient** to be a regular language.

## Proof of Pumping Lemma for FSL Family 👨‍👩‍👧‍👦

1. ∃ DFA M := (Q, Σ, δ, q<sub>0</sub>, F)

2. p := |Q|

3. s ∈ ℒ(M)

4. |s| ≥ p

5. s := a<sub>1</sub>, a<sub>2</sub>, ..., a<sub>p</sub>, ..., a<sub>n</sub>
   
   1. Where n := |s|

6. for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, a<sub>i</sub> ∈ Σ:
   
   1. Create a state q<sub>0</sub> with a transition a<sub>1</sub> to q<sub>1</sub>
   
   2. Create a state q<sub>i</sub> with a transition to q<sub>i+1</sub> labelled with a<sub>i+1</sub>

7. We choose some k < n to be the first state in the machine that is repeated
   
   1. We assume that there is at least one repeated state
   
   2. How do we know that there has to be a repeated state at all?
   
   3. Pigeonhole principle
   
   4. These states are numbered from q<sub>0</sub> to q<sub>n</sub> with k < n
   
   5. Therefore, for a string of length n, there must be ??? TODO

8. Let x := the string from q<sub>0</sub> to the first time we encounter q<sub>k</sub>

9. Let y := the string from the first encounter of q<sub>k</sub> to the next encounter of q<sub>k</sub>
   
   1. We know that this string must have some length because we encounter q<sub>k</sub> *twice* i.e. we enter q<sub>k</sub> and come back to it at some later point after reading in inputs
   
   2. Even if we have a self-loop, we have a length of 1

10. Let z := the string from the second encounter of q<sub>k</sub> to the end q<sub>n</sub>

11. xy<sup>0</sup>z ∈ ℒ(M) because we go from the initial state to the final accepting state q<sub>n</sub> and thus the machine accepts the string

12. All other xy<sup>i</sup>z must also be in ℒ(M) because we can always remove the y loop and, since it is a DFA, we will always return to q<sub>k</sub> 

13. Because all xy<sup>i</sup>z are in ℒ(M), we can say that s := xy<sup>i</sup>z

### Example

<div align="center">
Σ := {a, b, c} <br>
L := {a<sup>i</sup>b<sup>j</sup>c<sup>k</sup> | i = j or i = k}
</div>

1. Suppose L were FSL

2. Therefore, PL applies

3. Let s := a<sup>p</sup>b<sup>p</sup>c<sup>p</sup> ∈ L

4. From (2), since s ∈ L, we can write s = xyz
   
   1. Such that:
   
   2. |xy| ≤ p
   
   3. |y| > 0

5. Because |xy| ≤ p, xy must contain only a's
   
   1. The first p symbols of s are only a's

6. We can write out:
   
   1. s = a<sup>|x|</sup>a<sup>|y|</sup>a<sup>(p - |x| - |y|)</sup>b<sup>p</sup>c<sup>p</sup>

7. Since PL applies for all values of i, consider i := 0 and s'

8. s' = xy<sup>0</sup>z = xz

9. From the PL and (8), s' must be in L

10. s' is not in L because s' = a<sup>|x|</sup>a<sup>(p - |x| - |y|)</sup>b<sup>p</sup>c<sup>p</sup> = a<sup>(p - |y|)</sup>b<sup>p</sup>c<sup>p</sup>
    
    1. p - |y| ≠ p
       
       1. |y| must be > 0

11. (9) and (10) create a contradiction ⚠️

12. ∴ L is not an FSL

QED
