# Week Six, Lecture One
When talking about linear context free grammars, we will be using the following language a lot:

<div align='center'>
{a<sup>i</sup>b<sup>j</sup>c<sup>k</sup>d<sup>l</sup> | i = j, k = l}
</div>

CFGs can represent this language because the context free languages are **closed under concatenation**. They can also do `i = l, j = k` i.e. nested because there is no dependency between more than two elements.

*However*, something like {a<sup>i</sup>b<sup>i</sup>c<sup>i</sup>} CANNOT be represented with a CFG because it is a **destructive read out** (we'll get to that later). They also can't do:

<div align='center'>
{a<sup>i</sup>b<sup>j</sup>c<sup>k</sup>d<sup>l</sup> | i = k, j = l}
</div>

because two matches are intermixed/intersecting.

## (N)PDAs 👨‍❤️‍💋‍👨
DFAs
- Black box with some initial state, some accepting states, and transitions in between, labelled with symbols
- We then generalized to NFAs, allowing multiple transitions for the same symbol at the same state, no transitions for any symbol, and epsilon transitions
- In both of these models, we had some input string that we read from beginning to end, no ifs or buts.

All of this is true for PDAs too, but the difference is in **finite memory**. N/DFAs have *finite* memory, it's even in the name! PDAs on the other hand, are allowed *unlimited* memory! How?

We represent this memory as a **stack**. An infinite stack. The PDA derives its name from a "pushdown," an old term for a spring device used in cafeterias to hold plates. You can only take the top plate off the pushdown, as most of it is underneath some surface like a countertop. When you take the top plate off, thoough, the one underneath it *pops* up due to the spring! 

A PDA has a **stack alphabet** Γ. It's the same idea as the input alphabet Σ: (finite (for our purposes)) set of symbols not including the empty string.

Along with a stack, we need a few basic operations that make a stack... a stack:
- push
- pop
- peek - a combined push and pop for the same symbol
    - swap - a combined pop for one symbol and a push for another
- empty? - not strictly possible

Now, we can represent a PDA as follows:

```
[Machine with nodes and arrows] <--\
    ^                              |
    |                           [Stack]
[Input string]                      
```

With these actions:
- read input (or don't care)
- read top of stack (or don't care)
- change state q → q'
- stack actions from above

Compared to our puny little NFA arrows, these bad boys are more complicated! They have TWO parts to their arrows!

$$
q \xrightarrow{s_i, a \rightarrow b} q'
$$

means "if we read input symbol s<sub>i</sub> and a is on the top of the stack, then we push b and transition to state q'."

What about epsilon transitions? We got those too:

$$
\text{pop}: \\
q \xrightarrow{s_i, a \rightarrow \epsilon} q'
$$

$$
\text{push}: \\
q \xrightarrow{s_i, \epsilon \rightarrow a} q'
$$

$$
\text{peek}: \\
q \xrightarrow{s_i, a \rightarrow a} q'
$$

$$
\text{swap}: \\
q \xrightarrow{s_i, a \rightarrow b} q'
$$

## Closure Properties

## Pumping Lemma for CFLs 💡

## Deterministic PDAs

