# 3.3: Algorithms

The idea of an algorithm itself is a fairly modern, meta-notion of mathematics. Before that, we still had algorithms of course, but we didn't really think of them, the algorithms themselves, as mathematical objects in their own right. What sparked this idea is given below in a history lesson.

## History of "Algorithms"

David Hilbert had a list of 23 mathematical problems, the tenth of which was that of an **integral root algorithm** for finding the integral root for a polynomial if it existed. (Spoiler: it doesn't.) For this problem, we needed the *idea* of an "algorithm" in the first place though.

Two solutions came in in 1936:

- *Lambda calculus* from Alonzo Church

- The **Turing machine** from Alan Turing

Both of these defined what it meant to be an "algorithm" formally and, per the **Church-Turing thesis**, are actually equivalent with our human intuitive definitions of an "algorithm."

This is why deciders are historically called "algorithms." Because they literally *were* by definition.

## Describing Turing Machines

There are three (artificially constructed and somewhat arbitrary) levels of depth for describing a TM according to Sipser:

1. Formal description - Incredibly tedious, verbose, and complex. The lowest level.

2. Implementation description - English/natural language prose describing the way the machine moves its head, stores its data on tape, and handles inputs, but not its specific states or transition function. Like pseudocode.

3. High-level description - English/natural language prose describing the algorithm/steps taken, without mention of the input tape or head. This is the most common when defining an "algorithm" in, say, CS 180.

## Encoding

Turing machines can technically only accept strings as inputs. However, we often want them to work on things like graphs, polynomials, grammars, or even other Turing machines!

We do this by **encoding** a particular higher-level structure into a string representation. This sounds like it's new and weird, but you're actually already used to it if you've programmed in something like Lisp before.

How would you represent a graph in Lisp? Probably something like:

```lisp
((nodes), ((edge), (edge), ...))
```

This is a string *encoding* of a graph, even though it isn't enclosed in double quotes or something. Like I said, you're already used to string encodings, you just didn't think of them as "encodings."

With TMs, encodings are denoted with angle brackets \<Encoded Form\>. So if G is a graph, then \<G\> is the string encoding of G. 
