# 4.1: Decidable Languages

## Acceptance Testing

Isn't it annoying when you have to say if a DFA accepts a string for homework? What if we could write a program to automate that? Well, we would need a way to input a DFA and a way to input the string we wanna test. Then we need to actually code the program.

Since Turing machines *are* computation, anything we can do in a Turing-complete programming language we can do in a Turing machine (and vice versa more importantly). This is the magic of Turing machines! We can *automate* things! Code things.

So, how do we make this TM? First we recognize that the language of this TM is:

<div align='center'>
A<sub>DFA</sub> = {(B, w) | B is a DFA that accepts w}
</div>

To show that this kind of program is actually (1) possible and (2) terminates and does what we want, we have to prove that it is **decidable**. If A<sub>DFA</sub> is decidable, then we can write this program.

To construct this TM M, we first see if B is a DFA. If not, reject. Now, we write down B's current state q and current input symbol ∈ Σ (remember the good old days?) onto M's tape. Initially, B's state is q<sub>0</sub> and it's reading the first, leftmost symbol of w. We run B's transition function as a subroutine and update our tape accordingly. When M finishes processing w, we accept iff B is in an accepting state and reject otherwise.

## Emptiness Testing

What if our DFA B accepts nothing at all? How do we check this?

<div align='center'>
E<sub>DFA</sub> = {(B) | B is a DFA and L(B) = Ø}
</div>

Our TM for B is:

1. Mark the q<sub>0</sub> of B as "seen"

2. While some state is marked as seen:
   
   1. Mark any state that has an incoming arrow from an already "seen" state as "seen" itself

3. Now that we can no longer mark any new states, check if we have marked an accept state. If so, accept. Else, reject.

## Equivalency Testing

How do we check if two DFAs recognize the same language? That L(A) = L(B)?

We define our language as:

<div align='center'>
EQ<sub>DFA</sub> = {(A, B) | A, B are DFAs, L(A) = L(B)}
</div>


